Control allocator page (#1923)
PX4/PX4-user_guide: en/concept/control_allocation.md

# Control Allocation (Mixing)

The PX4 architecture ensures that the airframe layout does not require special case handling in the core controllers.

Mixing means to take force commands (e.g. `turn right`) and translate them to actuator commands which control motors or servos.
For a plane with one servo per aileron this means to command one of them high and the other low.
The same applies for multicopters: Pitching forward requires changing the speed of all motors.

Separating the mixer logic from the actual attitude/rate controller greatly improves reusability.

<!-- https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/1Li9YhTLc3yX6mGX0iSOfItHXvaUhevO2DRZwuxPQ1PI/edit -->
![Mixing Overview](../../assets/diagrams/mixing_overview.png)

:::note
How to setup mixing and outputs is documented [here](../config/actuators.md).
:::

## Actuator Control Pipeline

Overview of the mixing pipeline in terms of modules and uORB topics:
<!-- https://drive.google.com/file/d/1L2IoxsyB4GAWE-s82R_x42mVXW_IDlHP/view?usp=sharing -->

> <img alt="Pipeline Overview" src="../../assets/concepts/control_allocation_pipeline.png" width="1200" style="text-align: center; margin-left: -230px; margin-right: -230px; max-width: 200%"></img>

Reviewer: The other image doesn't scale properly because it is fixed width. If we do it this way then the user can click the image to get it full screen.
```suggestion
![Pipeline Overview](../../assets/concepts/control_allocation_pipeline.png)
```

Notes:
- The rate controller outputs torque and thrust setpoints
- the `control_allocator` module:
  - handles different geometries based on configuration
  - does the mixing
  - handles motor failures
  - publishes the motor and servo control signals

>   - publishes the servo trims separately so they can be added to the actuator testing

Reviewer: "so they can be added to the actuator testing" doesn't mean anything to me.

Reviewer: Let's say that then.
```suggestion
  - publishes the servo trims separately so they can be added as an offset when [testing actuators](../config/actuators.md#actuator-testing) (using the test sliders).
```

# Control Allocation (Mixing)

> The PX4 architecture ensures that the airframe layout does not require special case handling in the core controllers.
> 
> Mixing means to take force commands (e.g. `turn right`) and translate them to actuator commands which control motors or servos.
> For a plane with one servo per aileron this means to command one of them high and the other low.
> The same applies for multicopters: pitching forward requires changing the speed of all motors.
> 
> Separating the mixer logic from the actual attitude/rate controller greatly improves reusability.

Reviewer: @bkueng This is a little confusing to me (I understand it, but find it hard to read). I have attempted to re-write and further capture that we also abstract the output function mapping.

```suggestion
PX4 takes desired torque and thrust commands from the core controllers and translates them to actuator commands which control motors or servos.

The translation depends on the physical geometry of the airframe.
For example, given a torque command to "turn right" (say):
- A plane with one servo per aileron will command one of servo high and the other low.
- A multicopter will yaw right by changing the speed of all motors.

PX4 separates this translation logic, which is referred to as "mixing" from the attitude/rate controller.
This ensures that the core controllers do not require special handling for each airframe geometry, and greatly improves reusability.

In addition, PX4 abstracts the mapping of output functions to specific hardware outputs.
This means that any motor or servo can be assigned to almost any controller output.  
```

Author: This is copied from the existing page. Yes yours is better.

`can be assigned to almost any controller output` -> `can be assigned to almost any physical output`?
`The whole process is known as "control allocation"` -> I guess it can be interpreted in different ways, we typically use it as synonym for "mixing" (so w/o the physical output assignment). But then again we also use it to refer to the whole new architecture, which technically isn't accurate.

Reviewer: OK, I have removed that last point "The whole process is known as "control allocation". It just seems odd to have two terms - then define mixing but not "control allocation".

Also took your first suggestion.

  - does the mixing
  - handles motor failures
  - publishes the motor and servo control signals
  - publishes the servo trims separately so they can be added to the actuator testing
- the output drivers:
  - handle the hardware initialization and update
  - use a shared library [src/libs/mixer_module](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/lib/mixer_module/).
    The driver defines a parameter prefix, e.g. `PWM_MAIN` that the library then uses for configuration.
    Its main task is to select from the input topics and assign the right data to the outputs based on the user set `<param_prefix>_FUNCx` parameter values.
    For example if `PWM_MAIN_FUNC3` is set to **Motor 2**, the 3rd output is set to the 2nd motor from `actuator_motors`.
  - output functions are defined under [src/lib/mixer_module/output_functions.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/lib/mixer_module/output_functions.yaml).
- if you want to control an output from MAVLink, set the relevant output function to **Offboard Actuator Set x**, and then send the [MAV_CMD_DO_SET_ACTUATOR](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#MAV_CMD_DO_SET_ACTUATOR) MAVLink command.

> ## Adding a new Geometry or Output Function

Reviewer: @bkueng Assuming you are happy with MY changes I think we should merge this and iterate.

The specific part which needs more work (IMO) is this section - as I'm sure you are aware.

I am not sure this is sufficient for someone else to understand what they do for their new frame from this - say a "chinook". So I'd pull out some of the things from that doc which show the "have to do" vs the "specific case".

I really don't know what bits are most relevant, but perhaps an explanation of what you need in the YAML - e.g. https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/commit/5cdb6fbd8e1352dcb94bd58918da405f8ff930d7#diff-c89677865693eb56c0125d5b99b9cac8b7c8bf774f51260fac6c4ce22f7a2137R382

Or we can get someone else to upgrade one of the frames and ask them to work out what they think is relevant?

Author: Yes there's a lot that could be said, but I'm not sure what people actually need. We can also see when someone goes through this the first time.
Adding output functions was already done by several people successfully.

This probably helps as a reference for the config: https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/validation/module_schema.yaml#L440=

Reviewer: Fair enough. I can't judge. I added https://github.com/PX4/PX4-user_guide/pull/1923/files#r914562653 to include this reference - if you're happy with that then lets merge.

See [this commit](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/commit/5cdb6fbd8e1352dcb94bd58918da405f8ff930d7) for how to add a new geometry.
The QGC UI will then automatically show the right configuration UI when `CA_AIRFRAME` is set to the new geometry.

[This commit](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/commit/a65533b46986e32254b64b7c92469afb8178e370) shows how to add a new output function.
Any uORB topic can be subscribed and assigned to a function.

> ## Setting the Default Airframe Geometry

Reviewer: So I wanted to capture how this is enabled and how you set it for an airframe.

Author: Makes sense

    Its main task is to select from the input topics and assign the right data to the outputs based on the user set `<param_prefix>_FUNCx` parameter values.
    For example if `PWM_MAIN_FUNC3` is set to **Motor 2**, the 3rd output is set to the 2nd motor from `actuator_motors`.
  - output functions are defined under [src/lib/mixer_module/output_functions.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/lib/mixer_module/output_functions.yaml).
- if you want to control an output from MAVLink, set the relevant output function to **Offboard Actuator Set x**, and then send the [MAV_CMD_DO_SET_ACTUATOR](https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html#MAV_CMD_DO_SET_ACTUATOR) MAVLink command.

## Adding a new Geometry or Output Function

See [this commit](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/commit/5cdb6fbd8e1352dcb94bd58918da405f8ff930d7) for how to add a new geometry.
The QGC UI will then automatically show the right configuration UI when `CA_AIRFRAME` is set to the new geometry.

[This commit](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/commit/a65533b46986e32254b64b7c92469afb8178e370) shows how to add a new output function.
Any uORB topic can be subscribed and assigned to a function.

> 

Reviewer: How about this reference for the yaml validation?

```suggestion

Note that parameters for control allocation are defined in [src/modules/control_allocator/module.yaml](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/src/modules/control_allocator/module.yaml)
The schema for this file is [here](https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot/blob/main/validation/module_schema.yaml#L440=) (in particular, search for the key `mixer:`

```
